Gastric and gastroesophageal adenocarcinomas (GEACs) continue to be a major health burden globally and represent the third leading cause of cancer death.1 Among patients with metastatic disease, most die of their cancer because the currently available armamentarium is limited. The progress against GEACs has been slow compared with many other solid tumors despite many attempts. Even when GEAC is localized, it imposes considerable challenges for the patient, relatives, and treatment team alike. Localized GEAC is best managed by a multidisciplinary approach incorporating a team of surgeons, radiation oncologists, pathologists, gastroenterologists, radiologists, medical oncologists, nutritionists, social workers, geneticists, and midlevel providers (eg, physicians assistants). Orchestrating and administering multidisciplinary care adds a level of complexity that can be partially overcome by managing a large number of patients to improve efficiency of treatment, preemptive management of complications, and enhanced communication among teams. Treatment decisions for patients with localized GEAC are based on the information discussed in a multidisciplinary conference after an appropriate and thorough clinical staging process is completed, patients/relatives are well informed of the consensus achieved, and their choices are discussed. For all potentially curable GEACs, treatment preferably should be performed at a high-volume center of excellence. This review focuses on the management of localized GEAC. The management of metastatic disease has been recently reviewed by Murphy et al.2
Gastric Adenocarcinoma
Go
Gastric adenocarcinoma (GAC) is estimated to be the 15th most common cause of cancer death among men in the United States and the third most common cause of cancer death worldwide.1 In 2016, the estimated number of new cases and deaths from gastric cancer (GC) in the United States were 26,370 and 10,730, respectively.3 The incidence of GC in the United States has been steadily declining.

Gastric adenocarcinoma is treated according to the clinical stage established before initiation of therapy.4 Patients with cT1 (a or b) cancer could be treated endoscopically or by limited surgery (including a laparoscopic approach), but higher stages require more involved therapies. Clinical categories greater than T1 could designate a patient's GAC as potentially curable (technically resectable GAC in a patient who can withstand surgery) or unresectable (incurable in most cases). In such circumstance, surgery, when feasible, is one of the most effective treatments. However, surgery alone appears inadequate, resulting in a limited number of cures (often <50%). A surgical oncologist with expertise in D2 dissection should be engaged to perform GAC surgery.5, 6, 7 Adjunctive therapy (either before or after surgery) has improved the cure rate by at least 10% above what can be achieved by surgery alone.8, 9, 10, 11 The type of adjunctive approach has varied by region.12 In North America and Europe, the postoperative chemoradiation adjuvant10 or preoperative chemotherapy approach9 are popular, but in Asia, postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy is utilized most frequently.13, 14

The main therapeutic goal for patients with unresectable GAC is symptom palliation using approaches similar to those used to treat advanced GAC. Treatment options for resectable GAC are discussed in the following sections.

SurgeryGo
In the United States, 67% of patients present with stage III or IV disease and only 10% with stage I disease.15 A detailed description of surgical techniques is beyond the scope of this review. However, a well-trained surgical oncologist should be engaged to perform formal D2 gastrectomy that can produce the best results for the patient.16, 17, 18 Achievement of negative margins is crucial for cure because the cure rates are extremely low when margins are not clear of cancer.19 Data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program for 1973-200020 that analyzed 1377 patients with GAC (stages IIIA, IIIB, and IV, M0) revealed that the total lymph node (LN) count (or number of disease-negative LNs examined; P<.0001) and number of disease-positive LNs (P<.0001) were independent prognosticators for overall survival (OS). The stage-based OS also correlated with total LN count and number of nonmalignant LNs. In a previous analysis, for every 10 extra LNs dissected, OS improved by 7.6% (T1/2N0), 5.7% (T1/2N1), 11% (T3N0), or 7% (T3N1).21 Prospective studies in non-Asian countries have not confirmed these findings.5, 22, 23, 24 Additionally, there appears to be no benefit from performing lymphadenectomy beyond a D2 dissection.25, 26 Despite the lack of unequivocal data to support the routine use of D2 dissection, current sentiments among experts favor a thorough lymphadenectomy for proper N staging.

Perioperative ChemotherapyGo
Level 1 evidence of benefit for improved OS was established in a study by Cunningham et al9 that randomized 503 patients to surgery or chemotherapy plus surgery. Although OS rates in both arms were generally poor, patients who received chemotherapy fared significantly better (hazard ratio [HR], 0.75; 95% CI, 0.60-0.93; P=.009) than those who did not have chemotherapy. Less than 50% of patients could receive postoperative chemotherapy. Another smaller, underpowered trial that was terminated early because of poor accrual (slightly underaccrued with 224 of the planned 250 patients enrolled and changed eligibility to include patients with GC) suggested similar benefit with the addition of chemotherapy to surgery.27 Similar to the study by Cunningham et al, only 50% of patients could receive postoperative chemotherapy. A follow-up British trial that added bevacizumab to preoperative chemotherapy found no benefit in OS and substantial complication rates.28, 29, 30 Currently, we recommend consideration of perioperative chemotherapy in patients who have cT2 or higher disease and any nodal involvement. Similarly, all patients with GAC who are considered appropriate candidates for perioperative therapy should also be considered for a staging laparoscopy before initiation of therapy. Routine laparoscopy is not recommended for patients with esophageal cancer (EC) or gastroesophageal junction cancer; however, a decision to perform staging laparoscopy in this group of patients should be based on multidisciplinary consensus.

Postoperative ChemoradiotherapyGo
The US intergroup postoperative adjuvant chemoradiation trial (Intergroup 0116) documented benefit in OS for patients with GAC who had an R0 resection and were given chemoradiation compared with those who were simply observed after surgery.10 A longer follow-up revealed that the benefits in progression-free survival and OS prevailed.31 In this trial, surgery was not part of the protocol, and it was performed mostly in community medical centers. The quality of surgery was suboptimal. Thus, postoperative chemoradiation improved the outcomes considerably even in the face of suboptimal surgery, raising the question of whether it would provide benefit after “optimal” surgery (see subsequent discussion). On the basis of the Intergroup 0116 results, postoperative chemoradiation could be recommended as adjuvant therapy if a suboptimal GAC surgery were performed.

Another trial conducted by the US Intergroup examined an entirely different question in the context of postoperative adjuvant chemoradiation. In this trial, chemoradiation therapy was the same for the 2 groups of patients, but the additional chemotherapy used was epirubicin and cisplatin plus infusional 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) or 5-FU alone.32 There was no difference in OS, confirming that epirubicin and cisplatin plus infusional 5-FU is not better than 5-FU alone. In addition, this trial could have asked more important questions: for example, should the concurrent chemotherapy (with radiation) use 1 agent or 2 agents?

A Korean study (the Adjuvant Chemoradiation Therapy in Stomach Cancer [ARTIST] trial) studied patients with GAC who had D2 nodal dissection and randomized patients to postoperative chemoradiation or chemotherapy.33 In 458 patients randomized, there was no difference in OS. This study was complicated, asking more than one question (is postoperative chemoradiation better than chemotherapy and is chemoradiation meaningful in patients with GAC who had D2 dissection). Updated results remained the same.34 An even more complicated follow-up trial (ARTIST 2; NCT01761461) has been proposed. Findings from the Chemoradiotherapy After Induction Chemotherapy of Cancer in the Stomach (CRITICS) trial, which examined the role of postoperative chemoradiation vs chemotherapy, were presented at the 2016 annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncologists.35 This trial found no benefit to adding radiotherapy postoperatively in patients treated with adequate chemotherapy and D2 resection. Therefore, the ARTIST and CRITICS trial results suggest that if a D2 lymph node dissection is accomplished, postoperative chemoradiation as adjuvant therapy does not prolong survival.36
Among the ongoing trials, the results of the TOPGEAR (Trial of Preoperative Therapy for Gastric and Esophagogastric Junction Adenocarcinoma) study of preoperative therapy for gastric and esophagogastric junction adenocarcinoma are awaited.37 TOPGEAR is examining the role of preoperative chemoradiation.

Postoperative ChemotherapyGo
The Adjuvant Chemotherapy Trial of S-1 for Gastric Cancer (ACTS-GC) trial randomized 1059 patients (D2 dissection first) to 1 year of the oral fluoropyrimidine S-1 or observation and documented OS benefit.13 An updated follow-up revealed that the benefits were sustained.8
The Capecitabine and Oxaliplatin Adjuvant Study in Stomach Cancer (CLASSIC) trial randomized 1035 patients who had undergone D2 gastrectomy to capecitabine plus oxaliplatin for 6 months or observation, and initially there was significant prolongation of disease-free survival (at 3 years: HR, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.44-0.72; P<.0001).14 With further follow-up, there was OS benefit for patients who had adjuvant chemotherapy (95% CI, 0.51-0.85; P=.0015).11
Two other large trials, the SAMIT (Stomach Cancer Adjuvant Multi-institutional Trial) study from Japan and the ITACA-S (Intergroup Trial of Adjuvant Chemotherapy in Adenocarcinoma of the Stomach) study from Italy, attempted to add more chemotherapy (taxane, platinum, or irinotecan) to the backbone of 5-FU or S-1 monotherapy; both trials had negative results.38, 39 Tables 1 and 2 summarize major phase 3 trials in GC that are completed or ongoing.