Background

Patients with persistent lower abdominal complaints are common in primary care [1]. At presentation, the general practitioner (GP) has to differentiate between potentially life-threatening significant colorectal diseases (SCD), such as colorectal cancer (CRC) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and functional bowel disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome. As symptoms and signs alone have insufficient specificity, GPs refer many patients for endoscopy to not miss an SCD diagnosis. Consequently, 60–80 % of referred patients do not have SCD at endoscopy [2–6], unnecessarily straining healthcare budgets and endoscopy schedules, and exposing many non-SCD patients to a small but realistic risk of severe endoscopy-associated complications.

Thus, an improved diagnostic strategy that can safely rule out SCD is needed. Previous – largely non-primary care – studies have shown that diagnostic strategies solely based on symptoms and signs are unlikely to suffice [7, 8]. Adding faecal biomarkers to such diagnostic strategies may, however, improve their performance. One promising faecal biomarker is calprotectin, which indicates the presence of intestinal inflammation [9]. Calprotectin has been recommended by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) to help distinguish between IBD and non-IBD [10]. However, calprotectin has only been evaluated as a single test without accounting for other diagnostic information [11–13]. Furthermore, the presence of faecal haemoglobin (Hb) may indicate neoplastic disease [14]. Faecal occult blood tests have previously been included in diagnostic strategies for CRC with limited success [15, 16]. Over the past decade these tests have improved substantially, mainly because of specific immunochemical detection of human Hb, resulting in so-called faecal immunochemical tests for Hb (FITs) [14].

We designed the large-scale prospective CEDAR study (Cost-Effectiveness of a Decision rule for Abdominal complaints in primary caRe), to develop a new diagnostic strategy to safely rule out SCD in primary care patients with lower abdominal complaints, thus reducing the number of unnecessary endoscopy referrals. To meet this aim, we specifically quantified the incremental diagnostic accuracy of a point-of-care (POC) calprotectin test and a POC FIT above routine diagnostic information, both individually and in combination. We specifically focused on POC tests as these can be easily executed at the time and place of patient care.

Methods

Study design
The prospective diagnostic CEDAR study enrolled patients from 266 Dutch primary care practices referred for endoscopy from July 2009 through January 2012 [11]. Patients were eligible if suspected of SCD, defined by lower abdominal complaints for at least 2 weeks, combined with rectal bleeding, change in bowel habit, abdominal pain, fever, diarrhoea, weight loss, and/or a sudden onset of abdominal complaints at?>?50 years of age. Patients were excluded if aged below 18, known with SCD, or with confirmed parasitic bowel infection. Recruitment was at the GP’s office (19.0 %) or directly following endoscopy scheduling (81.0 %). If not directly recruited by their GP, our research staff contacted eligible patients. If at any time during the study patient referral outpaced our study resources, each nth scheduled patient was screened and contacted to guarantee representativeness of the study population. The University Medical Center Utrecht ethics committee approved the study (protocol number 08-462E), and all patients gave written informed consent.

History taking and physical examination
Patient and GP questionnaires facilitated a structured history taking. Abdominal pain, rectal blood loss or mucus, weight loss, and fever were considered present upon patient or GP report; duration of abdominal pain, abdominal bloating, and family history of CRC upon patient report; and change in bowel habit upon GP report. We defined constipation as at least two of the following symptoms: less than three bowel movements/week, difficult/incomplete defecation, hard/lumpy faeces, sensation of anorectal obstruction, or laxative use. We based diarrhoea on frequently loose/liquid faeces, or anti-diarrhoea medication use. GPs reported the presence of a palpable abdominal mass or an abnormal digital rectal examination.

Blood and faecal SCD biomarkers
A pre-endoscopy venous blood sample was drawn to estimate Hb and C-reactive protein (CRP) concentrations according to routine clinical practice. Directly following study inclusion, patients provided faeces samples collected before bowel preparation for endoscopy in a plain blue-capped faecal container, and kept refrigerated (4 °C) for a maximum of 2 days before handing in. Study protocol allowed freezing (–20 °C) of faecal samples before processing (this occurred in 67.9 % of samples; median days between collection and processing: 10; 10th–90th percentile: 4–21). If not frozen, the refrigerated faecal samples needed to be processed for calprotectin testing within 6 days (adherence 96.3 %; median days: 2: 10th–90th percentile: 0–3), and needed to be tested for Hb within 3 days of collection (adherence 94.5 %; median days: 2: 10th–90th percentile: 0–3).

We analysed the faecal samples for calprotectin concentration by a quantitative POC test (Quantum Blue®; dynamic range 30–300 µg/g) and by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA; EK-CAL Calprotectin ELISA, both from Bühlmann Laboratories), both yielding estimates of µg calprotectin/g faeces, and for faecal Hb by a qualitative POC FIT (Clearview® iFOBT One Step Faecal Occult Blood Test Device, Alere Health), yielding either a positive or negative test result (lower detection limit of 6 µg/g). Laboratory technicians performed the ELISA, and trained research nurses the POC tests, blinded for clinical information and according to the manufacturers’ instructions. Briefly, for the calprotectin assays, 80 mg homogenized faeces was centrifuged and the supernatant was tested for calprotectin (1:16 diluted for the POC test and undiluted for the ELISA; supernatant for the ELISA was stored at –20 °C for maximally 4 months before analysis); for the POC FIT three separate random areas of the faecal sample were stabbed by the specimen collection stick and transferred to the collection tube, and two drops of extracted specimen were then applied to the test device. For more details see Kok et al. [11].

Diagnostic outcome
Experienced gastroenterologists from three high-volume centres (i.e. > 1000 endoscopies annually) performed endoscopy in all patients, i.e. colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy. A final diagnosis was established according to routine clinical practice, including histopathology of biopsies if required, and 3 months follow-up after negative endoscopy. We defined SCD as CRC, IBD, diverticulitis, or advanced adenoma (AA; > 1 cm). Outcome assessment was blinded for the biomarker test results and other diagnostic information.

Statistical analysis
In view of the number of SCD diagnoses [17], we first developed a basic diagnostic model for SCD considering 15 patient history and physical examination predictors (listed in Table 1) and simple blood analyses (Hb and CRP concentrations). We started by selecting patient history and physical examination predictors using Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC)-based stepwise-backward logistic regression; first considering and selecting only the patient history predictors, and then considering and selecting the physical examination predictors while keeping the selected patient history predictors fixed. Subsequently, Hb and/or CRP were only selected if they significantly improved the patient history/physical examination model. We deliberately used a more stringent selection criterion for the blood analyses (P?<?0.05 instead of AIC-based) in view of the patient burden associated with obtaining this information. Blood Hb and CRP were modelled continuously instead of using a threshold for abnormal values (e.g. defining anaemia), to preserve as much diagnostic information as possible.